>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA PUT
A SPOTLIGHT ON THE AMERICAN
ECONOMY TODAY, WHILE ACCUSING
WASHINGTON OF TAKING ITS EYE OFF
THE BALL.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT: WE
RECAP THE PRESIDENT'S SPEECH,
INCLUDING HIS PLEDGE TO FIGHT
FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS WITH NEW
INVESTMENTS IN JOBS, EDUCATION
AND HOMEOWNERSHIP.
>> Woodruff: THEN IN AN
EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW, THE
MAJORITY LEADER OF THE SENATE
EXPRESSED OPTIMISM THAT CONGRESS
WILL START TO BE PRODUCTIVE
AGAIN.
WE TALK WITH NEVADA DEMOCRAT
HARRY REID.
>> THERE'S STILL 60% OF THE
REPUBLICANS WHO WANT TO DO GOOD
THINGS, AND I'M CONFIDENT THAT
SOME OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE--
HAVE TEA PARTY AFFILIATION, I
THINK EVEN THEY'RE TIRED OF THE
GRIDLOCK.
>> Brown: A NEW REPORT SAYS
WHERE YOU LIVE AND WORK CAN MAKE
CLIMBING THE ECONOMIC LADDER
TOUGHER.
WE EXPLORE A DETAILED PORTRAIT
OF AMERICAN SOCIAL MOBILITY.
>> Woodruff: IN ONE OF
CALIFORNIA'S OLDEST PRISONS,
ONCE VIOLENT INMATES ARE BEING
TRANSFORMED INTO PEACEMAKERS.
WE PROFILE THAT PROGRAM,
WRAPPING UP OUR SERIES ON
STOPPING GUN VIOLENCE.
>> THIS IS 52 WEEKS OF VERY
DIFFICULT SELF-EXPLORATION.
THE SUCCESS OF THE PROGRAM IS
WHETHER OR NOT AFTER THEY'RE
DONE THEY REALLY DO STICK TO
THAT COMMITMENT OF NON-VIOLENCE.
>> Brown: JUBILANT CROWDS IN
BRAZIL HAVE GREETED POPE
FRANCIS.
MARGARET WARNER LOOKS AT HIS
FIRST TRIP ABROAD AS PONTIFF, TO
A NATION SHAKEN BY ANTI-
GOVERNMENT PROTESTS.
>> Woodruff: AND A NEW BOOK
EXAMINES THE RECENT HISTORY OF
PRESIDENTS SENDING TROOPS INTO
BATTLE, WITHOUT DECLARING WAR.
RAY SUAREZ SITS DOWN WITH
VETERAN JOURNALIST MARVIN KALB.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."xD
>> Brown: IT WAS BILLED AS A
MAJOR POLICY SPEECH, AS
PRESIDENT OBAMA CALLED HIS
COMMITMENT TO COMBATING ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY HIS HIGHEST PRIORITY
AND BLASTED PARTISAN POLITICS IN
WASHINGTON FOR UNDERMINING
CONTINUED RECOVERY.
>> WITH AN ENDLESS PARADE OF
DISTRACTIONS, POLITICAL
POSTURING AND PHONY SCANDALS,
WASHINGTON HAS TAKEN ITS EYE OFF
THE BALL.
AND I AM HERE TO SAY THIS NEEDS
TO STOP.
THIS NEEDS TO STOP.
>> Brown: PRESIDENT OBAMA KICKED
OFF HIS PUSH TO RE-FOCUS ON
JUMP-START THE ECONOMY AT KNOX
COLLEGE IN GALESBURG, ILLINOIS--
THE SITE OF HIS FIRST MAJOR
SPEECH AS A FRESHMAN SENATOR IN
2005.
>> THIS MOMENT DOES NOT REQUIRE
SHORT-TERM THINKING.
IT DOES NOT REQUIRE HAVING THE
SAME OLD STALE DEBATES.
OUR FOCUS MUST BE ON THE BASIC
ECONOMIC ISSUES THAT THE MATTER
MOST TO YOU-- THE PEOPLE WE
REPRESENT.
>> Brown: THE PRESIDENT SAID
FIVE CORNERSTONES SUPPORT HIS
PLAN TO REBUILD AMERICA'S MIDDLE
CLASS.
>> GOOD JOB, A GOOD EDUCATION
FOR YOUR KIDS, A HOME OF YOUR
OWN, SECURE RETIREMENT.
FIFTH, I WILL KEEP FOCUSING ON
HEALTH CARE, BECAUSE MIDDLE-
CLASS FAMILIES AND SMALL
BUSINESS OWNERS DESERVE THE
SECURITY OF KNOWING THAT NEITHER
ILLNESS NOR ACCIDENT SHOULD
THREATEN THE DREAMS YOU'VE
WORKED A LIFETIME TO BUILD.
>> Brown: HIS SPEECH CAME AMID
SOME SIGNS OF AN ECONOMIC
REBOUND, BUT CONTINUING
CONCERNS.
HIRING, WHILE ON THE UPSWING,
REMAINS SLUGGISH.
THE LATEST JOBS NUMBERS PUT THE
NATION'S UNEMPLOYMENT RATE AT
7.6% COMPARED TO A HIGH OF 10%
DURING THE DEPTH OF THE DOWNTURN
IN 2009.
AND HOUSING PRICES AND CONSUMER
CONFIDENCE CONTINUE TO RISE.
BUT THE PRESIDENT SAID MORE WORK
STILL LIES AHEAD.
>> WE NEED A NEW PUSH TO REBUILD
RUN-DOWN NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> WE NEED NEW PARTNERSHIPS WITH
SOME OF THE HARDEST-HIT TOWNS IN
AMERICA TO GET THEM BACK ON
THEIR FEET.
AND BECAUSE NO ONE WHO WORKS
FULL-TIME IN AMERICA SHOULD HAVE
TO LIVE IN POVERTY, I WILL KEEP
MAKING THE CASE THAT WE NEED TO
RAISE A MINIMUM WAGE BECAUSE ITS
IS LOWER THAN IT WAS WHEN RONALD
REAGAN TOOK OFFICE.
IT'S TIME FOR THE MINIMUM WAGE
TO GO UP.
>> Brown: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
DEMANDED A NEW POLITICAL
APPROACH TO TACKLING THE
NATION'S PROBLEMS.
>> THE KEY IS TO BREAK THROUGH
THE TENDENCY IN WASHINGTON TO
JUST BOUNCE FROM CRISIS TO
CRISIS.
WHAT WE NEED ISN'T A THREE-MONTH
PLAN, OR EVEN A THREE-YEAR PLAN,
BUT A LONG-TERM AMERICAN
STRATEGY, BASED ON STEADY,
PERSISTENT EFFORT, TO REVERSE
THE FORCES THAT HAVE CONSPIRED
AGAINST THE MIDDLE CLASS FOR
DECADES.
THAT HAS TO BE OUR PROJECT.
>> Brown: EVEN BEFORE THE
REMARKS, BUT AFTER ITS FOCUS AND
THEME HAD BEEN REPORTED,
REPUBLICAN LEADERS WERE OUT IN
FORCE, CRITICIZING THE
PRESIDENT'S CAMPAIGN-LIKE
STRATEGY.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
DEMANDED SPECIFICS:
>> THERE ARE NO NEW PROPOSALS IN
THIS SPEECH.
THE PRESIDENT HIMSELF SAID IT
ISN'T GOING TO CHANGE ANY MINDS.
ALL RIGHT, WELL SO EXACTLY WHAT
WILL CHANGE?
WHAT'S THE POINT?
WHAT'S IT GOING TO ACCOMPLISH?
PROBABLY GOT THE ANSWER--
NOTHING.
IT'S A HOLLOW SHELL.
IT'S AN EASTER EGG WITH NO CANDY
IN IT.
>> Brown: AND SENATE MINORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL SAID TO
BE EFFECTIVE, THE PRESIDENT MUST
ENGAGE REPUBLICANS.
>> EVERY TIME HE GOES OUT AND
GIVES ONE OF THESE SPEECHES, IT
GENERATES LITTLE MORE THAN A
COLLECTIVE BIPARTISAN EYE ROLL.
IT'S JUST SUCH A COLOSSAL WASTE
OF TIME AND ENERGY, RESOURCES
THAT WOULD BE BETTER SPENT
ACTUALLY WORKING WITH BOTH
PARTIES IN CONGRESS TO GROW THE
ECONOMY AND CREATE JOBS.
>> Brown: THE BACK-AND-FORTH
COMES AS AMERICA'S GROWING
FRUSTRATION WITH WASHINGTON,
ESPECIALLY CONGRESS.
AN A.B.C./"WASHINGTON POST" POLL
RELEASED TODAY FOUND 73% OF
AMERICAN'S DISAPPROVE OF
CONGRESS'S JOB.
AND ANOTHER, BY NBCND T AHE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" PUT THE
DISAPPROVAL RATING AT 83%, AN
ALL TIME HIGH FOR THAT SURVEY.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
JONATHAN WEISMAN SAID OPPOSITION
TO THE DAY'S SPEECH IS ALL PART
OF A LARGER REPUBLICAN STRATEGY
TO TAKE ON MANY OF THE
PRESIDENT'S  ECONOMIC
PRIORITIES.
>> THEY BELIEVE THAT THEY ARE
ANSWERABLE TO A DIFFERENT
ELECTORATE THAN THE ONE THAT
SENT PRESIDENT OBAMA BACK TO
POWER.
THEY DON'T BELIEVE THAT THEY ARE
DOING OUT OF SPITE.
THEY BELIEVE THEY ARE THAT THEY
ARE REPRESENTING THEIR VOTERS
AND TO MOST OF THESE REPUBLICANS
THEY PROBABLY ARE.
>> Brown: BUT PRESIDENT OBAMA
TODAY SAID HE IS READY FOR THE
POLITICAL FIGHTS AND COMPROMISES
THAT LIE AHEAD.
>> IN THIS EFFORT, I WILL LOOK
TO WORK WITH REPUBLICANS AS WELL
AS DEMOCRATS WHEREVER I CAN.
I BELIEVE THERE ARE MEMBERS OF
BOTH PARTIES WHO UNDERSTAND
WHAT'S AT STAKE, AND I WILL
WELCOME IDEAS FROM ANYBODY, FROM
ACROSS THE POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
BUT I WILL NOT ALLOW GRIDLOCK,
INACTION, OR WILLFUL
INDIFFERENCE TO GET IN OUR WAY.
>> Brown: STILL, OTHER MAJOR
FINANCIAL DEADLINES LOOM LARGE
OVER CAPITOL HILL.
ON THE AGENDA AFTER THE AUGUST
RECESS: AVOIDING A GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN BY OCTOBER 1 AND ONCE
AGAIN RAISING THE NATION'S DEBT
CEILING.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN WATCH ALL
OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SPEECH
ONLINE.
COMING UP, WE'LL PICK UP ON
POLITICS AND THE ECONOMY, AS WE
SIT DOWN WITH SENATE MAJORITY
LEADER HARRY REID AND LOOK AT A
NEW STUDY LINKING INEQUALITY AND
GEOGRHY IAPN THE U.S.
PLUS, FELONS TURNED PEACEMAKERS;
POPE FRANCIS IN BRAZIL AND
JOURNALIST AND AUTHOR MARVIN
KALB.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: RUSSIAN MEDIA TODAY
REPORTED NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY LEAKER EDWARD SNOWDEN NOW
HAS OBTAINED A DOCUMENT ALLOWING
HIM TO ENTER RUSSIA.
THAT ALLOWS HIM TO LEAVE THE
TRANSIT ZONE OF MOSCOW'S AIRPORT
WHERE HE'S SPENT THE PAST MONTH.
BUT SNOWDEN'S ATTORNEY SAID
HE'LL REMAIN AT THE AIRPORT FOR
NOW, UNTIL HIS ASYLUM STATUS IN
RUSSIA IS FINALIZED.
>> ( translated ): THE ISSUE IS
NOT YET RESOLVED.
EDWARD SNOWDEN HASN'T BEEN
DENIED ASYLUM STATUS, BUT
UNFORTUNATELY THE CURRENT
SITUATION IS A TRULY UNIQUE ONE
FOR RUSSIA.
BUREAUCRACY INVOLVED IN THE
PROCESS SO HIS DOCUMENTS ARE
STILL BEING LOOKED OVER.
>> Holman: IN WASHINGTON, A
STATE DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN
SAID SNOWDEN'S MOVEMENT FROM THE
AIRPORT WOULD BE DEEPLY
DISAPPOINTING.
SHE SAID SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY DISCUSSED THE MATTER WITH
RUSSIA'S FOREIGN MINISTER TODAY.
THE LEADER OF EGYPT'S MILITARY
CALLED TODAY FOR MASS
DEMONSTRATIONS TO SHOW HE HAS
POPULAR SUPPORT TO CONFRONT ON-
GOING VIOLENCE.
THE ARMY CHIEF URGED EGYPTIANS
TO DEMONSTRATE ON FRIDAY IN
SUPPORT OF THE ARMY AND POLICE
FORCES.
THE MILITARY HAS BEEN CRACKING
DOWN ON LOYALISTS TO PRESIDENT
MOHAMMED MORSI SINCE IT REMOVED
HIM FROM POWER EARLIER THIS
MONTH.
>> ( translated ): I WOULD LIKE
TO CALL ALL THE EGYPTIANS TO
TAKE TO THE STREETS TO REMIND
THE WHOLE WORLD OF THE EGYPTIAN
WILL AND DECISION.
THEREFORE, I WOULD LIKE YOU TO
TAKE THE STREETS TO SHOW THE
WORLD THAT YOU ARE GIVING THE
MILITARY AND POLICE A MANDATE TO
PUT AN END TO VIOLENCE AND
TERRORISM.
>> Holman: MORSI'S MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD RESPONDED BY SAYING
THE GENERAL'S CALL WAS AN OPEN
INVITATION TO CIVIL WAR.
THEY PLAN THEIR OWN
DEMONSTRATIONS ON THE SAME DAY.
IN ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT, THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION SAID IT HAS
DELAYED THE SALE OF FOUR F-16
FIGHTER JETS TO EGYPT IN THE
WAKE OF MORSI'S OUSTER.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT DID NOT MENTION
MORE THAN A BILLION DOLLARS IN
OTHER MILITARY ASSISTANCE.
A TRAIDERAILED IN NORTHWESTERN
SPAIN TODAY, KILLING AT LEAST 35
PEOPLE.
SOME 50 PEOPLE WERE INJURED.
IT OCCURRED NEAR A TRAIN STATION
IN SANTIAGO DE COMPOSTOLA, AS
THOUSANDS OF PILGRIMS WERE
TRAVELING THERE FOR A CHRISTIAN
FESTIVAL TOMORROW.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE WORD WHAT
CAUSED THE DERAILMENT.
POLICE IN INDIA TODAY ARRESTED
THE PRINCIPAL OF THE SCHOOL
ATTENDED BY 23 CHILDREN WHO DIED
LAST WEEK AFTER EATING
CONTAMINATED SCHOOL LUNCHES.
TESTS SHOWED COOKING OIL USED TO
PREPARE THE MEALS CONTAINED HIGH
LEVELS OF A PESTICIDE.
IT WAS PURCHASED FROM A SHOP
OWNED BY THE PRINCIPAL'S
HUSBAND.
47 CHILDREN IN ALL FELL ILL
AFTER CONSUMING THE MEAL.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS NOMINATED
CAROLINE KENNEDY TO BE THE NEXT
U.S. AMBASSADOR TO JAPAN.
THE DAUGHTER OF LATE PRESIDENT
JOHN F. KENNEDY WAS AN IMPORTANT
EARLY SUPPORTER OF MR. OBAMA'S
2008 CAMPAIGN FOR THE WHITE
HOUSE.
IF CONFIRMED BY THE SENATE,
KENNEDY WOULD BE THE FIRST WOMAN
TO SERVE AS THE AMERICAN ENVOY
IN JAPAN.
IN WASHINGTON, HOUSE LAWMAKERS
MOVED TODAY TO ACT ON A MEASURE
THAT WOULD NULLIFY THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY'S AUTHORITY TO
COLLECT PHONE RECORDS OF
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME CONGRESS
HAS TAKEN UP THE ISSUE SINCE THE
RECE LEANTKS ABOUT THE N.S.A.'S
SECRET SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS.
MEANWHILE, NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
DIRECTOR JAMES CLAPPER BECAME
THE LATEST ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIAL TO SAY THE AMENDMENT
WOULD UNWISELY END A CRITICAL
COUNTERTERRORISM PROGRAM.
ALSO IN CONGRESS TODAY, THE
FATHER OF SLAIN TEENAGER TRAYVON
MARTIN APPEARED BEFORE A SPECIAL
CAUCUS ON RACE.
THE GROUP-- CONVENED BY BLACK
LAWMAKERS-- HOPES TO FOCUS MORE
ATTENTION ON ISSUES
DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECTING
BLACK MEN AND BOYS.
THEY GATHERED JUST DAYS AFTER
PRESIDENT OBAMA INSISTED THE
NATION HAS TO DO SOME SOUL-
SEARCHING IN THE WAKE OF THE
FLORIDA SHOOTING.
TODAY, TRACY MARTIN PRAISED THE
PRESIDENT FOR OPENING A NEW
NATIONAL DIALOGUE.
>> IT SPARKS THE CONVERSATION IN
EVERY HOUSEHOLD OVER THE DINNER
TABLE.
THAT CONVERSATION IS WHAT CAN WE
DO AS PARENTS?
WHAT CAN WE DO AS MEN?
WHAT CAN WE DO AS FATHERS?
WHAT CAN WE DO AS MENTORS TO
STOP THIS FROM HAPPENING TO YOUR
CHILD?
I THINK THAT'S WHERE THE
CONVERSATION BEGINS.
>> Holman: MARTIN SAID HE WANTS
TO CHANNEL HIS FAMILY'S TRAGEDY
INTO SOMETHING POSITIVE.
HE AND HIS WIFE HAVE ESTABLISHED
THE TRAYVON MARTIN FOUNDATION TO
ADDRESS ISSUES FACING YOUNG
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN.
STOCKS WERE MIXED ON WALL STREET
TODAY AFTER SEVERAL
DISAPPOINTING CORPORATE EARNINGS
REPORTS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 25 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,542.
THE NASDAQ ROSE A FRACTION OF A
POINT TO CLOSE AT 3,579.
THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF
CAMBRIDGE REVEALED THE NAME OF
THEIR SON TODAY: GEORGE
ALEXANDER LOUIS.
HE WAS BORN ON MONDAY, WEIGHING
EIGHT POUNDS, SIX OUNCES.
KENSINGTON PALACE OFFICIALS SAID
THE PRINCE, WHO IS THIRD IN LINE
TO THE BRITISH THRONE, WILL BE
KNOWN AS "HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
PRINCE GEORGE OF CAMBRIDGE."
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND TO OUR
NEWSMAKER INTERVIEW WITH SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER HARRY REID.
I SAT DOWN WITH HIM EARLIER
TODAY IN THE LYNDON BAINES
JOHNSON ROOM AT THE U.S.
CAPITOL.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID, THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
TALKING TO US.
>> IT'S REALLY MY PLEASURE.
I TRY TO WATCH ALMOST EVERY
NIGHT WHEN I'M HOME IN TIME.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S GREAT TO
HEAR.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS OUT ON THE
ROAD TODAY TRYING TO REFOCUS
AMERICANS ATTENTION ON THE
ECONOMY, TALKING ABOUT JOB
CREATION.
DO YOU THINK HE'S GOING TO BE
ABLE TO DO THAT?
AND SECOND OF ALL, DO YOU THINK
THAT CONGRESS IS GOING TO BE
ABLE TO DO WHAT IT SHOULD DO
THIS YEAR TO IMPROVE THE
ECONOMY?
>> FIRST OF ALL, THE PRESIDENTS
SPEECH IS NOT A PHOTO OP.
THIS IS SOMETHING HE'S BEEN
PLANNING FOR A LONG TIME.
I WAS AT THE WHITE HOUSE
RECENTLY AND I-- JUST THE TWO OF
US, AND I WAS STUNNED ABOUT HIS
OPTIMISM FOR DOING GOOD THINGS.
HE'S NEVER BACKED OFF OF WHAT HE
WANTS TO DO IS CREATE JOBS.
HE KNOWS THAT'S WHERE THE ISSUE
IS.
SO THIS ISN'T ONE SPEECH.
HE'S GOING TO GIVE A SERIES OF
THEM AND, IN EFFECT, KEEP HIS
EYE ON THE PRIZE.
AND THE PRIZE IS TO DO SOMETHING
TO HELP THE MIDDLE CLASS.
SO I SUPPORT WHAT HE'S DOING.
AND THE SECOND QUESTION YOU
ASKED ME IS WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT
IT HERE IN CONGRESS?
I HOPE THAT WHAT'S TAKEN PLACE
IN THE LAST WEEK OR SO HAS SET A
BETTER TONE HERE IN WASHINGTON.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE UPSET
WITH CONGRESS.
IF ONE OF THOSE POLLSTERS HAD
CALLED ME, I WOULD AGREE WITH
THE 83% THAT THINKS WE CAN DO A
BETTER JOB.
THEY DON'T CALL ME, BUT IF THEY
WOULD I WOULD TELL THEM HOW I
FEEL ABOUT CONGRESS MYSELF.
BUT WHAT WE WERE ABLE TO DO TO
DIFFUSE SOME OF THIS, WE WERE
ABLE TO GET SOME REPUBLICANS TO
BREAK AWAY FROM THE PACK AND
START WORKING AS WE USED TO DO,
TO COMPROMISE TO GET THINGS
DONE.
SO I HOPE THAT WITH THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS THAT'S FACING
US BECAUSE OF WHAT'S HAPPENED
WITH THE TEA PARTY-DRIVEN
REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP IN
CONGRESS, THAT REASONABLE
REPUBLICANS WILL BREAK AWAY FROM
THIS, BECAUSE WE CAN'T-- THEY'RE
THREATENING TO NOT PAY THE DEBTS
THE COUNTRY HAS ALREADY
INCURRED.
>> Reporter: BUT LET'S TALK
ABOUT THAT POLL.
YOU JUST CITED 83% OF AMERICANS
DISAPPROVE OF THE JOB THAT
CONGRESS IS DOING-- THE LOWEST
RATE IT'S EVER HAD.
ARE AMERICANS RIGHT IN THEIR
PERCEPTION?
>> YES, OF COURSE THEY'RE RIGHT.
GRIDLOCK.
WE HAVE GRIDLOCK.
WE HAVE A HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES-- THEY'RE DOING
NOTHING.
MY FRIEND THE SPEAKER WAS ON
TELEVISION ON ONE OF THE SUNDAY
SHOWS AND HE SAID, MY JOB ISN'T
TO PASS LAWS; IT'S TO REPEAL
THEM.
WELL, BY THAT METRIC HE'S FAILED
EVERY PLACE BECAUSE HE HASN'T
PASSED ANY LAWS AND HE DAMN SURE
HASN'T REPEALED ANY.
WE HAVE TO START TALKING ABOUT
THINGS WE WORK ON TOGETHER, AND
THAT IS WHAT'S MISSING HERE.
>> Woodruff: YOU SAID MOST OF
THE BLAME LIES WITH THE
REPUBLICANS, BUT DON'T, IN
FAIRNESS, THE DEMOCRATS BEAR
SOME OF THE RESPONSIBILITY?
AME ISY, YOU SHOULD TELL ME.
THERE, BUT WE HAVE PEOPLE WHO
WORK ALL THE TIME TRYING TO COME
UP WITH ISSUES.
BUT WE HAVE A SITUATION HERE.
LET'S ACKNOWLEDGE IT.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
REPUBLICANS IN THE HOUSE ARE TEA
PARTY MEMBERS.
40% OF THE REPUBLICANS HERE IN
THE SENATE, TEA PARTY.
THEY REPRESENT ABOUT 5% OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE BUT THEY VETO
EVERYTHING WE DO HERE.
AND THAT'S WHY THE LAST WEEK
THERE WAS A BREAKTHROUGH.
JOHN McCAIN AND OTHERS-- I
CALLED JOHN AND I SAID, "JOHN,
WE NEED TO TRY TO WORK SOMETHING
OUT ON THIS," AND HE STEPPED
FORWARD WITH OTHERS AND DID
THAT.
WHEN IT CAME TIME TO GO TO
FLOOR, I TALKED ABOUT JOHN
McCAIN MORE THAN I TALK ABOUT
DEMOCRATS.
>> Woodruff: SO THAT DID HAPPEN
JUST LAST WEEK, BUT TODAY THERE
IS TALK ABOUT POTENTIALLY
ANOTHER FILIBUSTER ON FUNDING
THE PRESIDENTS HEALTH CARE
REFORM, ON OBAMACARE.
COULD THE FIX THAT HAPPENED LAST
WEEK TURN OUT TO BE JUST
TEMPORARY?
>> JUDY, IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT
MIKE LEE, THE YOUNG MAN FROM
UTAH, IS TALKING ABOUT, READ
WHAT HE SAYS.
WHAT HE WANTS TO DO IS SHUT DOWN
THE GOVERNMENT TO GET RID OF
OBAMACARE, BUT IN THE PROCESS,
HE WANTS TO KEEP ALL THE GOOD
THINGS WE HAVE IN OBAMACARE: NO
PRE-EXISTING DISABILITY
PROBLEMS, NO LIMITS ON HOW MUCH
INSURANCE COMPANIES HAVE TO PAY.
THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT ALL
THE WELLNESS FOR MILLIONS OF
SENIORS STILL EXISTS.
YOU CAN STAY ON YOUR PARENTS
INSURANCE POLICY UNTIL YOU'RE
AGE 26.
HE'S LIVING IN A DREAM LAND.
SO REPUBLICANS-- EVEN
REPUBLICANS WON'T AGREE WITH
WHAT HE'S TRYING TO DO.
AND HE IS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
TEA PARTY, AND THAT SHOWS HOW
SENSELESS AND ILLOGICAL IT IS.
>> Reporter: BUT DO YOU THINK
IT'S POSSIBLE THAT WHAT HAPPENED
LAST WEEK COULD TURN OUT JUST TO
BE TEMPORARY, THAT YOU COULD
JUST END UP RIGHT BACK AT WAR
WITH THE...
>> I THINK IT'S POSSIBLE, BUT I
DON'T BELIEVE IT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN.
I BELIEVE THAT DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS WILL RECOGNIZE THAT
WE HAVE TO WORK TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: BUT SO YOU'RE
SAYING YOU BELIEVE REPUBLICANS
ARE READY TO WORK NOW WITH
DEMOCRATS, BUT YOU ALSO ARE VERY
CRITICAL OF THE TEA PARTY, SO
WHICH IS IT?
>> IT'S NOT AN EITHER/OR.
THE TEA PARTY MAKES UP 40%, I
REPEAT, OF THE REPUBLICAN CAUCUS
IN THE SENATE.
THEY CONTROL THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
BUT THERE ARE PEOPLE IN THE
SENATE WHO ARE BREAKING FROM
THAT.
NOW, THAT WAS PROVEN LAST WEEK
AND YOU KNOW, THERE'S STILL 60%
OF THE REPUBLICANS WHO WANT TO
DO GOOD THINGS, AND I'M
CONFIDENT THAT SOME OF THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE-- HAVE TEA PARTY
AFFILIATION, I THINK EVEN
THEY'RE TIRED OF THE GRIDLOCK.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE SICK OF
GRIDLOCK.
WE'RE NOT DOING IMPORTANT
THINGS.
SO WE SHOULD ALL WORK TOGETHER,
EVEN THE TEA PARTY.
>> Reporter: WELL, DESPITE WHAT
YOU SAY, THERE WAS A LOW MOMENT
VERY RECENTLY WHEN YOUR
COUNTERPART, THE MINORITY LEADER
IN THE SENATE, MITCH McCONNELL,
SAID YOU WERE ON THE VERGE OF
BECOMING THE WORST MAJORITY
LEADER THE SENATE HAD EVER SEEN.
WHAT WAS YOUR REACTION?
>> WELL, MITCH WAS UPSET BECAUSE
I WAS DOING, HE THOUGHT THAT
THAT WAS THE WRONG THING TO DO,
AND HE WAS FRUSTRATED, BUT HE'S,
OF COURSE, CHANGED HIS TUNE ON
THAT.
STICKS AND STONES WILL HURT MY
BONES, BUT NAMES WILL NEVER HURT
ME.
I'M VERY HAPPY.
I'VE BEEN THE MAJORITY LEADER
LONGER THAN ANYONE IN THE
HISTORY OF THIS COUNTRY EXCEPT
FOR MIKE MANSFIELD, AND I'M
PROUD OF THE WORK I'VE DONE, AND
SO IS MY DEMOCRATIC CAUCUS.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT'S YOUR
RELATIONSHIP RIGHT NOW WITH
SENATOR McCONNELL?
>> I THINK BECAUSE OF WHAT
HAPPENED LAST WEEK, IT'S GOING
TO BE BETTER.
WE'VE NEVER BEEN ENEMIES, HATED
EACH OTHER.
IT'S JUST BEEN A LITTLE
DIFFICULT TO WORK TOGETHER, AND
I THINK THINGS WILL GET BETTER.
THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS HIS
REPUBLICAN CONGRESS-- I WAS
>> Woodruff: ONE IS IT'S BEEN
REPORTED THE PRESIDENT DOES NOT
HAVE A VERY GOOD RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE CONGRESS.
HOW DO YOU SEE THAT?
>> I'VE BEEN HE FORRE 31 YEARS.
AND EVERY PRESIDENT, THAT'S WHAT
THEY THROW AT EVERY PRESIDENT.
I MEAN, THE ONLY THING THE
PRESIDENT HAS DONE IS HAD THE
REPUBLICANS MOVE INTO THE WHITE
HOUSE.
HE TAKES THEM TO DINNER ALL THE
TIME.
HE HAS THEM DOWN TO THE WHITE
HOUSE.
NOW, SOME OF THESE MEETINGS ARE
NOT PUBLIC IN NATURE, BUT THE
PRESIDENT REACHES OUT TO
REPUBLICANS A LOT.
IN FACT, HE'S REACHED OUT TO
THEM SO MUCH THAT SOME OF MY
DEMOCRATS ARE JEALOUS.
>> Reporter: CONGRESSIONAL
ELECTIONS NEXT YEAR.
A NUMBER OF DEMOCRATIC SENATE
SEATS ARE UP.
POLITICAL EXPERTS ARE OUT THERE
SAYING THE SENATE IS RIPE FOR
THE REPUBLICANS TO TAKE BACK
CONTROL.
>> I THINK REALISTICALLY THAT'S
NOT IN THE CARDS.
WE'D HAVE TO LOSE SIX SEATS, AND
THAT'S NOT GOING TO HAPPEN.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE DO NOT LIKE
THE BRAND OF THE REPUBLICANS,
LET'S FACE IT.
THEY'VE OFFENDED HISPANICS,
AFRICAN-AMERICANS, WOMEN, GAYS.
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING TO DO A LITTLE BETTER
BRANDING HERE.
>> Woodruff: WELL, PICKING UP ON
ONE THING YOU JUST SAID, THE
PRESIDENT MADE REMARKS LAST WEEK
IN CONNECTION WITH THE TRAYVON
MARTIN CASE ABOUT HOW AFRICAN-
AMERICANS ARE PERCEIVED IN THIS
COUNTRY.
WHAT DID YOU THINK ABOUT WHAT HE
SAID AND WHAT DOES IT SAY THAT
THERE'S NOT A SINGLE AFRICAN-
AMERICAN DEMOCRATIC MEMBER OF
THE U.S. SENATE?
>> OH, JUST HOLD YOUR BREATH;
CORY BOOKERS ON HIS WAY FROM NEW
JERSEY.
AND THAT'LL HAPPEN IN OCTOBER.
THE PRESIDENT MADE HIS REMARKS
EXTEMPORANEOUSLY.
ONLY HE COULD DO-- SAY WHAT HE
DID.
I AGREE WITH DAVID BROOKS, THE
REPUBLICAN COLUMNIST FOR THE
"NEW YORK TIMES."
AND I'M PARAPHRASING, BUT NOT
VERY MUCH.
HE SAID IT WAS ONE OF THE MOST
REMARKABLE PRESENTATIONS HE'S
EVER SEEN AND THOUGHT IT WAS ONE
OF THE HIGHLIGHTS OF THE
PRESIDENT'S PRESIDENCY.
SO I AGREE WITH HIM.
I THINK THIS WAS REALLY
REMARKABLE THAT HE HAD THE
COURAGE TO COME OUT AND TALK
ABOUT WHAT IS GOING ON IN
AMERICA.
AND HE HAD SOME ABILITY TO
RELATE TO THAT AS AN INDIVIDUAL.
>> Woodruff: SENATOR HARRY REID,
THE MAJORITY LEADER IN THE
SENATE.
WE THANK YOU FOR TALKING WITH
US.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, WATCH THE
DEMOCRATIC LEADER WEIGH IN ON A
POSSIBLE HILLARY CLINTON
PRESIDENTIAL BID IN 2016 AND THE
CHANCES OF IMMIGRATION REFORMAS.
YOU CAN WATCH THE FULL INTERVIEW
ON OUR WEB SITE.
NEXT WEEK, WE'LL AIR AN
INTERVIEW WITH REPUBLICAN
SENATOR JOHN McCAIN.
>> Brown: NOW WE PICK UP ON A
KEY ECONOMIC THEME RAISED BY THE
PRESIDENT TODAY AND MANY OTHERS
IN RECENT TIMES: INCREASING
INEQUALITY.
MANY FACTORS ARE INVOLVED IN
DETERMINING THE POTENTIAL FOR
UPWARD MOBILITY, BUT A NEW STUDY
HAS HIGHLIGHTED WHAT TURNS OUT
TO BE A HUGELY IMPORTANT ONE:
GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION.
FOR INSTANCE, A CHILD BORN IN
POVERTY IN ATLANTA OR
CHARLOTTE, HAS ROUGHLY A 4%
CHANCE OF RISING TO THE TOP
FIFTH OF INCOME EARNERS, WHILE
ODDS OF A SIMILAR CLIMB FOR A
CHILD BORN IN SALT LAKE CITY OR
SAN FRANCISCO ARE OVER 11%.
IT ALSO FOUND THAT GEOGRAPHY
MATTERED LESS FOR WELL-OFF
CHILDREN THAN FOR MIDDLE-CLASS
OR POOR ONES.
ONE OF THE STUDY'S CO-AUTHORS
JOINS US NOW: RAJ CHETTY,
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS AT
HARVARD UNIVERSITY.
WELCOME TO YOU.
LET'S BEGIN WITH HOW YOU DEFINE
ECONOMIC MOBILITY.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN AND HOW IS
IT MEASURED?
>> WE DEFINE ECONOMIC MOBILITY
AS THE ODDS THAT A CHILD FROM A
LOW-INCOME FAMILY MOVES UP IN
THE INCOME DISTRIBUTION.
SO, FOR INSTANCE, A CHILD
GROWING UP IN A FAMILY IN THE
BOTTOM FIFTH OF THE INCOME
DISTRIBUTION, WHAT'S THE CHANCE
THAT THAT CHILD REACHES THE TOP
FIFTH, FOR INSTANCE?
>> AND THIS -- SO IT'S -- THE
AMERICAN DREAM, SO TO SPEAK, OF
UPWARD MOBILITY IS WHAT YOU'RE
LOOKING AT?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
THE IDEA IS TO TRY TO MEASURE IS
THE AMERICAN DREAM ALIVE AND HOW
DOES IT VARY ACROSS AREAS OF THE
U.S. AND WHAT WE'RE FINDING,
BASICALLY, IS THAT THE CLASSIC
QUESTION "IS AMERICA THE LAND OF
OPPORTUNITY" MIGHT NOT ACTUALLY
BE THE RIGHT WE DO ASK.
BECAUSE THERE ARE SOME PLACES IN
AMERICA THAT ARE WELL-DESCRIBED
AS LANDS OF OPPORTUNITY WHERE
CHILDREN FROM LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES HAVE A HIGH PROBABILITY
OF SUCCEEDING BUT THERE ARE
OTHER PLACES THAT ARE BETTER
DESCRIBED AS, UNFORTUNATELY,
LANDS OF PERSISTENT INEQUALITY,
WHERE GENERATION AFTER
GENERATION WE SEE PERSISTENT
POVERTY.
>> Brown: WERE YOU SURPRISED
BY THE RESULTS OF WHAT YOU
FOUND?
EXPLAIN HOW GEOGRAPHY DOES COME
TO WORK AS A FACTOR.
>> I THINK WE WERE QUITE
SURPRISED BECAUSE WE WEREN'T
EXPECTING TO FIND SO MUCH
VARIATION WITHIN THE U.S.
THERE'S BEEN TALK IN THE MEDIA
NDA ACADEMIC RESEARCH ABOUT HOW
THE U.S. HAS LOWER RATES OF
MOBILITY THAN OTHER COUNTRIES
SUCH AS EUROPEAN COUNTRIES,
DENMARK AND SWEDEN AND SO FORTH.
WE WERE QUITE SURPRISED THAT
THERE ARE PLACES WITHIN THE U.S.
WITH RATES OF MOBILITY THAT ARE
COMPARABLE TO DENMARK AND
SWEDEN, AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER
PLACES THAT HAVE RATES OF UPWARD
MOBILITY THAT ARE LOWER THAN ANY
OTHER RICH COUNTRY FOR WHICH WE
HAVE DATA TODAY.
SO YOU WERE GIVING SOME
EXAMPLES.
SALT LAKE CITY, SAN JOSE, THESE
ARE PLACES THAT ARE AT THE VERY
TOP IN TERMS OF UPWARD MOBILITY.
OTHER CITIES LIKE CHARLOTTE,
RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA,
ATLANTA, ALL GENERALLY QUITE
VIBRANT ECONOMIES, ACTUALLY, IN
THE U.S. NEVERTHELESS HAVE
RELATIVELY LOW RATES OF UPWARD
MOBILITY.
>> Brown: SO IF THEY'RE ALL
VIBRANT ECONOMIC LOCATIONS, AS
YOU SAY, WHAT ARE THE FACTORS
THAT MAKE THEM DIFFERENT?
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE TRYING TO
INVESTIGATE.
WE HAVE A BUNCH OF HYPOTHESES
FOR WHICH WE HAVE SOME
CORRELATIONAL EVIDENCE AT THIS
POINT.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE KEY
CAUSAL FACTORS ARE, BUT SOME OF
THE CHANNELS THAT APPEAR TO
POTENTIALLY BE IMPORTANT ARE THE
LEVELS OF INEQUALITY WITHIN THE
AREA.
SO HOW MUCH DIFFERENCE IS THERE
BETWEEN THE HIGHER INCOMES AND
LOWER INCOMES WITHIN A GIVEN
CITY PICKING UP ON A THEME THE
PRESIDENT TALKED ABOUT EARLIER
TODAY.
ALSO WHAT APPEARED TO BE FAIRLY
IMPORTANT IS THE AMOUNT OF
SEGREGATION IN THE AREA.
SO A CITY LIKE ATLANTA, FOR
EXAMPLE, LOWER INCOME
INDIVIDUALS ARE NOT LIVING IN
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH THAT ARE WELL
INTEGRATED WITH HIGHER INCOME
FAMILIES AND THAT WE FOUND WAS A
COMMON CHARACTERISTIC OF THE
CITIES THAT HAD LOWER RATES OF
UPWARD MOBILITY.
WE ALSO FOUND CORRELATIONS WITH
PERHAPS NOT SURPRISINGLY THE
QUALITY OF LOCAL SCHOOLS AND
ALSO VARIOUS FACTORS THAT ARE
RELATED TO FAMILY STRUCTURE.
SO THE FRACTION OF TWO-PARENT
FAMILIES IN AN AREA AND MEASURES
OF CIVIC ENGAGEMENT AND
RELIGIOSITY, THE COHESIVENESS OF
THE COMMUNITY, IF YOU'D LIKE.
>> Brown: AND WITHIN A GIVEN
CITY YOU DO SEE DIFFERENCES IN
TERMS OF UPWARD MOBILITY?
>> SO WE'RE FOCUSING ON
DIFFERENCES IN UPWARD MOBILITY
ACROSS CITIES.
OUR STATISTICS DON'T ALLOW US TO
STUDY DIFFERENCES WITHIN A CITY
AND SO WHAT WE'RE DOING IS
COMPARING 740 DIFFERENT REGIONS
OF THE U.S.
WE BREAK UP THE U.S. INTO 740
SUBREGIONS AND WE'RE COMPARING
ACROSS THOSE AREAS.
>> Brown: I'M CURIOUS, NOW,
HOW DID YOU COME TO FOCUS ON
GEOGRAPHY IN THE FIRST PLACE?
WHAT WERE THE QUESTIONS THAT YOU
AND YOUR COLLEAGUES WERE ASKING?
>> SO THE WAY WE CAME AT THIS, I
THINK, IS WE WANTED TO GET A
BETTER PICTURE OF WHAT THE
DETERMINANTS OF EQUALITYF O
OPPORTUNITY ARE IN AMERICA.
AND OUR VIEW WAS THAT
POTENTIALLY WE COULD LEARN QUITE
A BIT IF THERE WAS VARIATION AT
CROSS PLACES WITHIN AMERICA.
SO THE IDEA IS IF WE CAN FIND
OUT WHAT IT IS THAT PLACES LIKE
SALT LAKE CITY AND SAN JOSE AND
BOSTON HAVE THAT ARE GENERATING
THESE HIGH RATES OF UPWARD
MOBILITY MAYBE WE CAN FIGURE OUT
THE KEY FACTORS THAT ARE GOING
TO INCREASE RATES OF UPWARD
MOBILITY IN ATLANTA AND
CHARLOTTE AND IN OTHER PLACES IN
THE U.S. THAT AREN'T AT THE
MOMENT HAVING HIGH RATES OF
UPWARD MOBILITY.
>> Suarez: THAT LEADS TO THE
NEXT QUESTION.
HOW DO -- DO WE KNOW HOW LOCKED
IN A CITY IS ONCE IT'S IN A
CERTAIN PLACE WHETHER FOR GOOD
OR ILL.
WHETHER IT CAN MOVE UP.
>> THAT'S A A FASCINATING
QUESTION TO THINK ABOUT GOING
FORWARD.
MY OWN VIEW IS THAT IT'S
UNLIKELY THAT ANY CITY IS
TOTALLY LOCKED IN.
I'M OPTIMISTIC THERE ARE THINGS
ONE CAN DO TO CHANGE THE LEVEL
OF MOBILITY.
WE HAVE SOME HYPOTHESES ABOUT
WHAT THESE ARE.
SO FOR INSTANCE IF WE THINK IT'S
SOMETHING RELATED TO SCHOOL
QUALITY WE'VE DONE SOME PRIOR
WORK IN OUR RESEARCH TEAM WHICH
I DISCUSSED EARLIER ON THE
NEWSHOUR SHOWING THAT THE
QUALITY OF TEACHERS AND THE
QUALITY OF SCHOOLS CAN CAN HAVE
VERY IMPORTANT LONG-TERM IMPACTS
AND THAT'S AN AREA IN WHICH WE
CAN MAKE CONCRETE STRIDES TO TRY
TO IMPROVE SCHOOL QUALITY IN
AREAS THAT DON'T HAVE AS GOOD
SCHOOLS AT THE MOMENT.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE TYPE OF
THING ONE COULD DO TO INCREASE
RATES OF UPWARD MOBILITY
THROUGHOUT THE U.S.
>> Brown: DOES THE DATA TELL
YOU NOW OR IS THIS SOMETHING YOU
LOOK AT WHETHER THE PROBLEM IS
GETTING WORSE?
DOES IT POINT TO THIS COUNTRY AS
EVEN MORE OF A CLASS SOCIETY
THAN WE'VE THOUGHT OF IN THE
PAST?
>> SO OUR DATA AT THE MOMENT
BASICALLY PROVIDE A SNAPSHOT OF
CHILDREN WHO WERE BORN IN THE
1980s AND WHOM WE'RE SEEING AT
AGE 30 TODAY.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH DATA AT THE
MOMENT TO LOOK AT CHANGES OVER
TIME.
BUT GOING FORWARD THE GREAT
THING ABOUT HAVING STATISTICS
LIKE THIS TO DO RESEARCH IS THAT
YOU HAVE THE PROSPECT OF
UNDERSTANDING HOW THINGS ARE
CHANGING AND FIGURING OUT WHICH
CITIES ARE GETTING BETTER AND
LEARNING MORE ABOUT HOW WE CAN
MAKE THE OTHER CITIES EVEN
BETTER GOING FORWARD.
>> Pelley: RAJ CHETTY OF
HARVARD UNIVERSITY, THAT YOU CAN
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, IT'S MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, THE THIRD
STORY IN OUR SERIES ON AIR AND
ONLINE ABOUT EFFORTS TO REDUCE
GUN VIOLENCE.
TONIGHT, A CALIFORNIA PROGRAM
THAT GIVES VIOLENT OFFENDERS THE
TOOLS TO RESOLVE CONFLICTS,
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE PRISON WALLS.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KATE OLSON
REPORTS.
A VERSION OF THIS STORY AIRED ON
THE PBS PROGRAM "RELIGION AND
ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY."
>> Reporter: FOR MOST OF ITS
160-YEAR HISTORY, SAN QUENTIN
HAS BEEN KNOWN AS A TOUGH PLACE
TO DO HARD TIME.
BUT OVER THE PAST TWO DECADES,
THIS HAS BEGUN TO CHANGE.
ALTHOUGH ONLY A TINY PORTION OF
STATE FUNDS GOES TOWARD
REHABILITATION, CONTRIBUTIONS
FROM CITIZENS SUPPORT INNOVATIVE
PROGRAMS AIMED AT REDUCING
VIOLENCE AND RECIDIVISM.
ONE PROGRAM MAKING A DIFFERENCE
WAS STARTED BY JACQUES VERDUIN.
>> THERE'S A GROWING ALIENATION
AND A LACK OF SENSE OF BELONGING
FOR MOST PEOPLE TODAY, IT SEEMED
THAT NOWHERE ELSE STRONGER THAN
IN OUR PRISON SYSTEM HAD WE
TURNED OUR BACKS ON EACH OTHER.
>> Reporter: A PSYCHOLOGIST WHO
HAS PRACTICED MEDITATION FOR
MANY YEARS, VERDUIN CREATED  A
PROGRAM CALLED GRIP-- GUIDING
RAGE INTO POWER.
THE YEAR LONG INITIATIVE SEEKS
TO HELP PRISONERS ADDRESS THE
ROOT CAUSES OF THEIR VIOLENT
BEHAVIOR AND MAKE THE JOURNEY OF
TRANSFORMATION FROM VIOLENT
OFFENDER TO PEACEMAKER FROM THE
INSIDE OUT.
>> IS HOME JUST FOUR WALLS AND A
ROOF ON THE OUTSIDE?
OR IS HOME A STATE OF MIND AS
WELL?
CAN YOU GO HOME BEFORE YOU
LEAVE?
CAN YOU LEAVE PRISON BEFORE YOU
GET OUT?
>> THE REALITY IS THAT THE
PAROLE BOARD DOES NOT GRANT
PAROLE VERY EASILY.
SO FOR MANY OF THEM THEY DON'T
ACTUALLY KNOW WHEN THEY WILL GET
OUT OF PRISON.
AND WHAT I  THINK THE GRIP
PROGRAM HAS DONE IS OFFERED THEM
A WAY TO NOT BE TRAPPED BY THAT,
TO REALIZE THAT THEY'RE LIVING
THEIR LIVES RIGHT NOW, THAT
THEY'RE STILL PART OF A
COMMUNITY.
IT'S NOT THE COMMUNITY OUTSIDE
THE PRISON BUT IT'S THE
COMMUNITY INSIDE THE PRISON.
>> Reporter: ELIZABETH SIGGINS,
WHO VISITED SAN QUENTIN THE DAY
WE WERE THERE, IS A SENIOR
POLICY ADVISOR IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF CORRECTIONS AND
REHABILITATION FOR THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA.
>> WHEN YOU WORK IN A PRISON
SYSTEM, YOU DON'T THINK THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO SIT IN A GROUP
OF OFFENDERS AND CLOSE YOUR
EYES.
WHEN I WAS SITTING THERE TODAY I
THOUGHT, I FEEL SAFE.
>> Reporter: CREATING THIS SAFE
ENVIRONMENT IS THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRISONERS
WHO UNDERSTAND THAT THE PROGRAM
BELONGS TO THEM.
>> MY NAME IS ROBIN, AND I'M A
PEACEMAKER...
>> Reporter: FELLOW INMATES,
LIKE ROBIN GUILLEN, WHO ARE
GRADUATES OF THE PROGRAM, GUIDE
THE WEEKLY SESSIONS.
>> THERE'S A PART WE EXPLORE
HERE AND DISCUSS ABOUT OURSELVES
ON WHY WE ACTED VIOLENTLY.
>> Reporter: GUILLEN HAS SERVED
40 YEARS IN PRISON-- 20 OF THEM
HERE AT SAN QUENTIN-- FOR A
MURDER HE COMMITTED AT AGE 17.
AFTER WITNESSING A STABBING
OUTSIDE HIS CELL, HE MADE A
DECISION TO TURN HIS LIFE AROUND
PAINFUL PAST.
>> CAN YOU GO BACK TO THE FIRST
TIME YOU WITNESSED TRAUMA ORIN .
>> MY FATHER AND COUSIN WERE IN
A FIGHT IN THE LIVING ROOM AND
MY FATHER STABBED MY COUSIN MANY
TIMES.
AND I WAS SITTING THERE CRYING,
BLOOD CURDLING CRIES OUT OF
SHEER FEAR AND TERROR.
THAT WAS MY FIRST EXPERIENCE OF
ORIGINAL PAIN.
>> Reporter: TO HELP THE NEW
CLASS OF PRISONERS UNDERSTAND
HOW PAIN AND SUFFERING FROM
THEIR PAST CAN TRIGGER VIOLENT
BEHAVIOR, ROBIN PROMPTED OTHERS
TO SHARE THEIR EXPERIENCE.
>> HOW MANY OF YOU SUFFERED FROM
TRAUMA IN EARLY LIFE AS AN
ADOLESCENT OR A LITTLE ONE?
>> EARLY ON IN MY LIFE
EVERYTHING YOU DO YOU GET HIT.
IT WAS SOMETHING THAT HAPPENED
TO ME THAT WAS JUST NORMAL.
IF YOU GO TO SCHOOL LATE, YOU
GET A WHIPPING.
IF YOU COME HOME LATE EVER YOU
THOSE THINGS TAUGHT ME TO BE
GET A WHIPPING.
AGGRESSIVE AND HURTFUL TOWARD
THOSE THINGS TAUGHT ME TO BE
OTHER HUMAN BEINGS.
AGGRESSIVE AND HURTFUL TOWARD
>> SEE IF YOU CAN CONNECT THE
OTHER HUMAN BEINGS.
EMOTIONAL FEELING WITH SOME
>> SEE IF YOU CAN CONNECT THE
SENSATION IN YOUR BODY.
EMOTIONAL FEELING WITH SOME
>> Reporter: THROUGH A PRACTICE
SENSATION IN YOUR BODY.
CALLED SITTING IN THE FIRE THE
>> Reporter: THROUGH A PRACTICE
INMATES LEARN TO FACE PAINFUL
CALLED SITTING IN THE FIRE THE
EMOTIONS FROM THEIR PAST.
INMATES LEARN TO FACE PAINFUL
>> SO BREATHING IN, WELCOME THIS
EMOTIONS FROM THEIR PAST.
FEELING, I FEEL THIS FEAR, THIS
>> SO BREATHING IN, WELCOME THIS
GRIEF, THIS ANXIETY.
FEELING, I FEEL THIS FEAR, THIS
>> IN MY EXPERIENCE IN WORKING
GRIEF, THIS ANXIETY.
IN SAN QUENTIN, I SAW THAT IT
>> IN MY EXPERIENCE IN WORKING
WAS OFTEN DIFFICULT STRONG
IN SAN QUENTIN, I SAW THAT IT
EMOTIONS THAT PROPELLED PEOPLE
WAS OFTEN DIFFICULT STRONG
IN LIFEA  OF CRIME AND ADDICTION
EMOTIONS THAT PROPELLED PEOPLE
AND TRYING TO MEDICATE WHAT
IN LIFEA  OF CRIME AND ADDICTION
COULD OTHERWISE PROCESS, SITTING
AND TRYING TO MEDICATE WHAT
IN THE FIRE, IN ESSENCE, IS
COULD OTHERWISE PROCESS, SITTING
BASICALLY A MOVEMENT OF
IN THE FIRE, IN ESSENCE, IS
RESPONSIBILITY, WHERE YOU SAY,
BASICALLY A MOVEMENT OF
THE CAUSES AND THE ORIGINS OF
RESPONSIBILITY, WHERE YOU SAY,
THIS FEELING LIE WITHIN ME, SO
THE CAUSES AND THE ORIGINS OF
YOU CAN STOP BLAMING.
THIS FEELING LIE WITHIN ME, SO
>> AND SEE THAT'S THE WHOLE
YOU CAN STOP BLAMING.
PIECE TO BE ABLE TO FEEL WHAT'S
>> AND SEE THAT'S THE WHOLE
GOING ON TO BE ABLE TO REALLY
PIECE TO BE ABLE TO FEEL WHAT'S
ADDRESS INTERNALLY WHAT IS THIS
GOING ON TO BE ABLE TO REALLY
FEELING?
ADDRESS INTERNALLY WHAT IS THIS
WHERE IS IT COMING FROM?
FEELING?
AND HOW I'M GOING TO RESPOND
WHERE IS IT COMING FROM?
VERSUS REACT.
AND HOW I'M GOING TO RESPOND
>> Reporter: MAKING AMENDS TO
VERSUS REACT.
FAMILIES OF THEIR VICTIMS IS
>> Reporter: MAKING AMENDS TO
ALSO PART OF THE JOURNEY IN GRIP
FAMILIES OF THEIR VICTIMS IS
AND TO THE EXPERIENCE OF INNER
ALSO PART OF THE JOURNEY IN GRIP
FREEDOM FOR GUILLEN.
AND TO THE EXPERIENCE OF INNER
>> I HAVE CHARACTER DEFECTS,
FREEDOM FOR GUILLEN.
FLAWS, AND I'M IMPERFECT.
>> I HAVE CHARACTER DEFECTS,
BUT I HAVE A WALK AND I HAVE A
FLAWS, AND I'M IMPERFECT.
COMMITMENT TO HONOR.
BUT I HAVE A WALK AND I HAVE A
AND TO HONOR THOSE PEOPLE THAT
COMMITMENT TO HONOR.
I'VE HURT.
AND TO HONOR THOSE PEOPLE THAT
AND I HAVE SOMETHING TO GIVE.
I'VE HURT.
AND I COULD EITHER GIVE IT IN
AND I HAVE SOMETHING TO GIVE.
HERE, OR I COULD GIVE IT OUT
AND I COULD EITHER GIVE IT IN
THERE.
HERE, OR I COULD GIVE IT OUT
>> THIS IS 52 WEEKS OF VERY
THERE.
DIFFICULT SELF-EXPLORATION.
>> THIS IS 52 WEEKS OF VERY
NOT ONLY DO THE FACILITATORS
DIFFICULT SELF-EXPLORATION.
HOLD THE MEN ACCOUNTABLE, THEY
NOT ONLY DO THE FACILITATORS
DO HOLD EACH OTHER ACCOUNTABLE,
HOLD THE MEN ACCOUNTABLE, THEY
AND ULTIMATELY, THE SUCCESS OF
DO HOLD EACH OTHER ACCOUNTABLE,
THE PROGRAM IS WHETHER OR NOT
AND ULTIMATELY, THE SUCCESS OF
AFTER THEY'RE DONE THEY REALLY
THE PROGRAM IS WHETHER OR NOT
DO STICK TO THAT COMMITMENT OF
AFTER THEY'RE DONE THEY REALLY
NON-VIOLENCE.
DO STICK TO THAT COMMITMENT OF
>> IT'S AN ENORMOUS GIFT TO A
NON-VIOLENCE.
COMMUNITY TO BRING BACK GROUPS
>> IT'S AN ENORMOUS GIFT TO A
OF MEN THAT HAVE BEEN IMPRISONED
COMMUNITY TO BRING BACK GROUPS
AND THE GIFT IS TO SAY, THESE
OF MEN THAT HAVE BEEN IMPRISONED
ARE SAFE MEN.
AND THE GIFT IS TO SAY, THESE
NOT ONLY WILL THEY NOT CREATE
ARE SAFE MEN.
CONFLICT OR VIOLENCE IN OUR
NOT ONLY WILL THEY NOT CREATE
COMMUNITY, THEY CAN HELP RESOLVE
CONFLICT OR VIOLENCE IN OUR
IT AND DE-ESCALATE IT.
COMMUNITY, THEY CAN HELP RESOLVE
>> Reporter: THIS GIFT WAS
IT AND DE-ESCALATE IT.
EVIDENT IN THE TESTIMONIES AT
>> Reporter: THIS GIFT WAS
THE GRADUATION CEREMONY OF LAST
EVIDENT IN THE TESTIMONIES AT
YEARS GRIP CLASS.
THE GRADUATION CEREMONY OF LAST
>> MY NAME IS VAUGHAN AND I'VE
YEARS GRIP CLASS.
BEEN INCARCERATED FOR 18 YEARS
>> MY NAME IS VAUGHAN AND I'VE
FOR TAKING THE LIFE OF KNEECK.
BEEN INCARCERATED FOR 18 YEARS
THROUGH ALL THAT HURT AND YOU
FOR TAKING THE LIFE OF KNEECK.
ACCEPT THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THROUGH ALL THAT HURT AND YOU
THAT, THEY HAVE A PART IN THERE
ACCEPT THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
CALLED SITTING ITHE N FIRE WHERE
THAT, THEY HAVE A PART IN THERE
YOU SIT WITH ALL THOSE EMOTIONS.
CALLED SITTING ITHE N FIRE WHERE
I GOT TO SEE ALL THE UGLY THAT I
YOU SIT WITH ALL THOSE EMOTIONS.
DID AND IT ALSO HELPED ME TO
I GOT TO SEE ALL THE UGLY THAT I
LOOK BACK AND FIND MY AUTHENTIC
DID AND IT ALSO HELPED ME TO
SELF, TO LOOK BACK AND SEE THE
LOOK BACK AND FIND MY AUTHENTIC
KID THAT CRIED WHEN HIS HAMSTER
SELF, TO LOOK BACK AND SEE THE
DIED AND TO ALLOW THAT PERSON TO
KID THAT CRIED WHEN HIS HAMSTER
COME FORTH AND SHINE AND GUIDE
DIED AND TO ALLOW THAT PERSON TO
ME, IF I CAN STOP ANOTHER KNEECK
COME FORTH AND SHINE AND GUIDE
FROM BEING KILLED AND ANHEROT
ME, IF I CAN STOP ANOTHER KNEECK
VAUGHAN FROM MURDERING SOMEONE,
FROM BEING KILLED AND ANHEROT
THEN I DID MY JOB!
VAUGHAN FROM MURDERING SOMEONE,
>>  OH HAPPY DAY...
THEN I DID MY JOB!
>> Reporter: IN A CLOSING
>>  OH HAPPY DAY...
RITUAL, SUPPORTERS WELCOMED THE
>> Reporter: IN A CLOSING
GRADUATES INTO THE COMMUNITY AS
RITUAL, SUPPORTERS WELCOMED THE
PEACEMAKERS READY TO GIVE BACK.
GRADUATES INTO THE COMMUNITY AS
>> Woodruff: AND YOU CAN JOIN US
PEACEMAKERS READY TO GIVE BACK.
ONLINE FOR A TWITTER CHAT
>> Woodruff: AND YOU CAN JOIN US
TOMORROW.
ONLINE FOR A TWITTER CHAT
WE'LL  DISCUSS SOME OF THE
TOMORROW.
ISSUES RAISED IN THIS SERIES.
WE'LL  DISCUSS SOME OF THE
FOLLOW "NEWSHOUR" ON TWITTER,
ISSUES RAISED IN THIS SERIES.
FOR DETAILS.
>> Brown: NEXT, TO BRAZIL, THE
SCENE OF THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL
TRIP BY POPE FRANCIS AS LEADER
OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
MARGARET WARNER HAS THE STORY.
>> Warner: HE HELD A SOLEMN
CEREMONY FOR  THOUSANDS INSIDE
THE ORTE BNAASILICA IN
APARECIDA.
WHILE OUTSIDE, TENS OF THOUSANDS
BRAVED THE COLD WINTER RAIN
AWAITING A GLIMPSE OF POPE
FRANCIS AND A FEW WORDS IN HIS
NATIVE SPANISH.
>> ( translated ): PRAY FOR ME.
PRAY FOR ME.
>> Warner: MANY EXPRESSED JOY AT
>> Warner: THE FIRST LATIN
AMERICAN POPE AND FIRST JESUIT
ONE CAME TO BRAZIL TO CELEBRATE
THIS WEEKEND'S WORLD YOUTH DAY,
A TRIENNIAL EVENT TO ENERGIZE
YOUNG CATHOLICS.
BRAZIL HAS THE WORLD'S LARGEST
CATHOLIC POPULATION, SOME 120
MILLION.
THE CHURCH HAS LOST GROUND TO
EVANGELICAL PROTESTANTS IN
RECENT YEARS.
YET AT EACH STOP, FRANCIS HAS
BEEN GREETED EXUBERANTLY.
ARRIVING MONDAY IN RIO, FRANCIS
DISPENSED WITH  THE CUSTOMARY
BULLET-PROOF POPEMOBILE, AND WAS
MOBBED BY THE CROWDS, SPARKING
SECURITY CONCERNS.
THERE HAVE ALSO BEEN SOME
SCATTERED PROTESTS.
>> ( translated ): THE ATTENTION
THE GOVERNMENT GAVE THE POPE'S
VISIT WAS $52.7 MILLION.
THAT'S TOO MUCH.
YOU COULD INVEST IN HEALTH OR
EDUCATION.
>> Warner: THAT THEME SPARKED
MASSIVE PROTESTS LAST MONTH
AGAINST SOCIAL INEQUALITY, AND
THE LAVISH SPENDING TO PREPARE
FOR HOSTING NEXT YEAR'S WORLD
CUP AND THE 2016 SUMMER
OLYMPICS.
WELCOMING THE POPE MONDAY
EVENING, PRESIDENT DILMA
ROSSEFUF REFLECTED THOSE
CONCERNS.
>> ( translated ): WE HAVE
BEFORE US A RELIGIOUS LEADER3l@&
SENSITIVE TO THE ASPIRATIONS OF
YOUNG PEOPLE, OF OUR PEOPLE, OF
SOCIAL JUSTICE, OPPORTUNITIES
FOR ALL, AND A CITIZENS'
DIGNITY.
WE STRUGGLE AGAINST A MMONCO
ENEMY, INEQUALITY IN ALL ITS
FORMS.
>> Warner: THE POPE, FOR HIS
PART, DESCRIBED HIS MISSION IN
BRAZIL THIS WAY.
>> ( translated ): I HAVE
NEITHER SILVER NOR GOLD, BUT I
BRING WITH ME THE MOST PRECIOUS
THING GIVEN TO ME: JESUS CHRIST!
I HAVE COME IN HIS NAME, TO FEED
THE FLAME OF FRATERNAL LOVE THAT
BURNS IN EVERY HEART.
>> Warner: TOMORROW FRANCIS WILL
VISIT ONE OF RIO'S LARGEST AND
MOST VIOLENT FAVELAS, OR SLUMS.
HE RETURNS TO ROME SUNDAY.
TO EXPLORE THE POPE'S VISIT TO
BRAZIL, I'M JOINED BY MARIE
ARANA, A PERUVIAN AMERICAN
AUTHOR AND JOURNALIST,  AND
MEMBER OF THE SCHOLAR'S COUNCIL
AT THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS.
SHE'S THE AUTHOR OF "BOLIVAR:
AMERICAN LIBERATOR."NK YOU SO M.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME,
MARGARET.
>> Warner: POPES USUALLY GET
ENTHUSIASTIC WELCOMES OVERSEAS.
BUT WHAT EXPLAINS THE FERVENT
OUTPOURING FOR THIS POPE IN
BRAZIL?
>> WELL, THE FACT THAT IT'S A
LATIN AMERICAN POPE, LET'S START
WITH THAT.
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH HAS
UNDERGONE A LOT OF CHANGES IN
THE PAST 100 YEARS.
IN 1910, 16% OF ALL CATHOLICS IN
THE WORLD WERE IN EUROPE.
NOW 40%-- WHICH IS ACTUALLY
MAJORITY-- ARE IN LATIN AMERICA.
AND THE GROWTH OF CATHOLICS
AROUND THE WORLD HAS BEEN IN THE
SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.
SO ESPECIALLY FOR LATIN AMERICA
THIS IS A VERY BIG STEP FOR THEM
TO BE INCLUDED AND TO HAVE A
WORLD LEADER AT THE LEVEL OF A
POPE TO BE ONE OF THEM.
>> Warner: IS THERE SOMETHING
DEEPER IN THE PHILOSOPHY AND
APPROACH HE'S BROUGHT NOT JUST
TO THE PAPACY BUT HIS MINISTRY
THROUGHOUT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THE LATIN AMERICAN CHURCH WHICH
BEGAN, LET'S SAY, WITH
BARTHOLOMEW DELAS CASAS, HE SAID
"WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A
GRASS-ROOTS PERSPECTIVE AND WE
ARE GOING TO START WITH THE POOR
AND THE PEOPLE.
AND PARTICULARLY WITH THE
INDIGENOUS."
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THAT THIS
POPE BRINGS BACK, THE CONCERN
FOR THE POOR, THE CONCERN FOR
THE SOCIALLY MARGINALIZED.
AND HE HAS REALLY EMPHASIZED
THAT IN HIS PASTORAL WORK.
SO IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO HIM.
>> Warner: AND HE BRINGS A
KIND OF HUMBLE STYLE.
I MEAN, WE'VE ALL READ THAT HE
DOESN'T WEAR THE RED PAPAL
SHOES, HE DOESN'T LIVE IN THE
LAVISH APARTMENTS THAT POPES
USUALLY DO.
DOES THAT HAVE SPECIAL RESONANCE
IN LATIN AMERICA EVEN TODAY?
>> YES, IT DOES.
ESPECIALLY FACT THAT HE'S TAKEN
THE NAME FRANCIS WHICH, OF
COURSE, WAS ST. FRANCIS OF
ASSISI.
THERE HAS BEEN NO OTHER FRANCIS.
AND ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI TO
LATIN AMERICANS IS A VERY BIG
FIGURE, VERY WORSIuhED FIGURE.
SO THAT MEANS A GREAT DEAL TO
THEM AS WELL.
THE FACT THAT THE POPE HAS ALSO
EXPRESSED CONCERN FOR WOMEN
BECAUSE HE IS A VERY DEEP
BELIEVER IN THE VIRGIN MARY.
WHEN HE WENT TODAY TO VISIT THE
APARECIDA, HE WAS MAKING A
STATEMENT THEN.
SO THAT MEANS A GREAT DEAL TO
LATIN AMERICANS AS WELL.
>> Warner: WHAT EXPLAINS,
THOUGH, THAT THERE HAS BEEN THIS
DROPOFF IN THE NUMBER OF
BRAZILIANS WHO IDENTIFY AS
CATHOLICS?
>> WELL, I WOULD SAY FOR THE
PAST 50 YEARS IN LATIN AMERICA
THE CHURCH HAS ASSOCIATED ITSELF
WITH THE POWERFUL AND WITH THE
MONEYED CLASSES.
AND THIS HAS TURNED THE TABLES
ON THE CHURCH A BIT.
SO THERE HAS BEEN GREAT BLEEDING
AWAY OF PEOPLE FROM THE CATHOLIC
CHURCH.
IN BRAZIL 90% -- ALMOST 890%
USED TO COUNT THEMSELVES
CATHOLICS IN 1980 AND TODAY IT'S
ALMOST -- YOU KNOW, BARELY CLOSE
TO 60%.
SO THERE HAS BEEN A DROPOFF.
NOT THAT CHRISTIANITY HAS LOST
BECAUSE THEY HAVE REMAINED
RISTIANS, THEY HAVE JUST GONE
TO THE OTHER SIDE, A LOT OF
THEM.
>> Warner: PROTESTANT
EVANGELICALS, IN FACT.
>> EXACTLY, EXACTLY.
>> Warner: SO WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING IN LATIN AMERICA IT ISN'T
THAT THERE'S BEEN THIS THIS HUGE
GROWTH IN SECULARIZATION AS,
SAY, IN EUROPE WHERE PEOPLE JUST
DON'T GO TO CHURCH BUT THEY'VE
SWITCHED TO EVANGELICALS.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO THEY HAVEN'T REALLY LEFT THE
FAITH IN A SENSE, THEY HAVEN'T
LEFT CHRISTIANITY, BUT THEY HAVE
MOVED OVER TO PROTESTANTISM TO
PENTECOSTALLISM, EVANGELISM,
CHARISMATICS AS WELL.
>> Warner: SO IS THIS POPE IN
A MISSION TO REVITALIZE THE
CHURCH IN LATIN AMERICA?
OTHER THAN BEING A SYMBOLIC
FIGURE?
>> A LOT OF SCHOLARS THINK SO.
I'VE SPOKEN TO QUITE A FEW WHO
HAVE SAID THAT THIS -- THE
FEELING -- THE GENERAL FEELING
IN LATIN AMERICA EVEN FOR THOSE
WHO ARE NOT CATHOLICS, THE
FEELING THAT THERE IS SOMEBODY
IN THAT POSITION OF POWER MEANS
THAT LATIN AMERICANS WILL BE
INCLUDED MORE -- AT A HIGHER
LEVEL.
LATIN AMERICANS FOR SO LONG HAVE
BEEN MISRESPECTED AND
UNREPRESENTED AND
UNDERREPRESENTED THAT NOW THEY
SEE A HEAD OF STATE-- BECAUSE
THAT'S WHAT A PONTIFF TRULY IS--
REPRESENTING THEM.
>> Warner: NOW, HE ARRIVES, OF
COURSE, AT A TIME OF TREMENDOUS
SOCIAL UNREST IN BRAZIL, AS WE
SAW FROM THOSE DEMONSTRATIONS
LAST MONTH.
HOW DOES HIS VISIT PLAY INTO
THAT AND CAN IT HELP ALLEVIATE
THOSE TENSIONS OVER SOCIAL
INEQUALITY OR MIGHT HIS MESSAGE
OF SOCIAL JUSTICE ADD FUEL TO
THE FIRE?
>> WELL, IT WAS REALLY
INTERESTING TODAY IN THE CLIPS
THAT YOU JUST SHOWED OF THE
PRESIDENT SORT OF ALLYING
HERSELF WITH THE SOCIAL JUSTICE
THAT THE POPE SO CLEARLY
REPRESENTS AND THE CONCERN FOR
THE POOR.
I THINK THAT THE POPE WILL HAVE
A CALMING INFLUENCE, SORT OF
TRANQUILIZING INFLUENCE.
IT DOESN'T HELP THAT THE STATE
HAS MANAGED TO SHELL OUT $52
MILLION FOR THE STATE VISIT BUT
WHAT THEY EXPLAIN IS THAT, IN
FACT, IT IS AN INVESTMENT
BECAUSE IT'S BROUGHT A LOT OF
TOURISM AND A LOT OF JOBS AND
WHAT NOT.
BUT IT'S STILL FOR THE PEOPLE TO
JUDGE.
>> Warner: BRIEFLY, IS THERE A
LOT AT STAKE FOR THE BRAZILIAN
GOVERNMENT?
>> I THINK THERE IS.
BECAUSE AT THIS POINT IT'S SUCH
A TENUOUS, VOLATILE SITUATION
THAT THEY NEED ALL THE HELP THEY
CAN GET IN CALMING THE
POPULATION AND SORT OF
STABILIZING THINGS.
AND I THINK IF THE POPE SAYS THE
RIGHT THINGS-- WHICH HE IS
LIKELY TO SAY -- ADDRESS AND, IN
FACT, I THINK THE CARDINALS HAVE
SAID HE WILL ADDRESS THE PROTEST
ISSUES AND I LOOK FORWARD TO SEE
WHAT HE SAYS TOMORROW BECAUSE
THAT WILL TELL THE TAIL.
>> Pelley: MARIE ARANA, THANK
YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
PRESIDENTS WHO SEND TROOPS INTO
CONFLICTS AROUND THE WORLD
SIDESTEPPING CONGRESS'S ROLE.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF A NEW
BOOK.
RAY SUAREZ TALKED WITH ITS
AUTHOR.
>> Suarez: THE POWER TO MAKE
WAR IS SUBJECT TO THE CHECKS AND
BALANCES FOUND THROUGHOUT THE
CONSTITUTION.
THE PRESIDENT ASKS CONGRESS TO
DECLARE WAR AND IT'S
CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL THAT
CLEARS THE WAY FOR A STATE OF
WAR.
BUT DECLARATIONS OF WAR ARE RARE
AND AMERICAN FORCES HAVE SEEN
PLENTY OF COMBAT WITHOUT THEM ON
THE ORDERS OF THE PRESIDENT.
VETERAN JOURNALIST AND TEACHER
MARVIN KALB IS TAKING A LOOK AT
THE EVOLVING POWER OF THE
PRESIDENT TO COMMIT THE COUNTRY
TO ACTION AROUND THE WORLD.
HIS NEW BOOK IS CALLED "THE ROAD
WARTO: PRESIDENTIAL COMMITMENTS
HONORED AND BETRAYED."
GREAT TO HAVE YOU HERE.
>> THANK YOU, RAY.
>> Suarez: AS I WAS READING
THE BOOK THE UNITED STATES HAS
BEEN ACTIVELY MILITARILY ENGAGED
IN A LOT OF PLACES IN THE LAST
60 YEARS WITHOUT A DECLARATION
OF WAR.
>> Pelley: WITHOUT A
DECLARATION WHICH HAS BECOME AN
ANTIQUE, A RARE REMEMBRANCE OF
FORMER TIMES.
THE LAST ONE WAS DECEMBER 8,
1941 WHEN ROOSEVELT WENT TO THE
CONGRESS AFTER THE JAPANESE
ATTACK ON PEARL HARBOR THE DAY
BEFORE AND HE SAID "I NEED A
DECLARATION OF WAR."
AND THEY GAVE IT TO HIM WITHIN A
COUPLE OF DAYS.
THERE WERE FOUR OTHER TIMES IN
AMERICAN HISTORY WHEN THAT
HAPPENED.
BUT AT NO TIME SINCE 1941 HAS
THE PRESIDENT EVER GONE TO
CONGRESS AND ASKED FOR A
DECLARATION.
>> Suarez: AND VIETNAM IS THE
CENTERPIECE OF YOUR BOOK AND YOU
ILLUSTRATE HOW SUCCESSIVE
PRESIDENTS WERE ABLE TO ESCALATE
THAT CONFLICT REALLY ON THEIR
OWN WRIT WITHOUT HAVING TO ASK
CONGRESS MUCH OF ANYTHING.
>> EXACTLY.
>FROM HARRY TRUMAN TORICHARD NIG
UNDER THE SHADOW OF A COLD WAR
AND THE COLD WAR ESSENTIALLY SET
THE TERMS UNDER WHICH A
PRESIDENT FUNCTIONED.
SO THE PRESIDENT COULD ASK FOR
SOMETHING.
SAY WE'RE IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
COLD WAR, THE SOVIET UNION IS
JUST AROUND THE CORNER SO WATCH
YOUR STEP AND THE CONGRESS -- NO
ONE IN CONGRESS WAS GOING TO
STAND UP AGAINST A PRESIDENT.
WHEN THE ISSUE WAS WAR AGAINST
COMMUNISM AND NOW THE ISSUE WAR
AGAINST TERRORISM AND NOBODY IN
CONGRESS IS REALLY STANDING UP
FOTO THE PRESIDENT.
WHAT I FOUND IN THIS BOOK IS
THAT ONE PRESIDENT AFTER ANOTHER
EVER SINCE WORLD WAR II CAN LEAD
THE COUNTRY INTO WAR RELATIVELY
EASILY NO ONE IS STANDING UP,
THERE ARE NO CHECKS AND
BALANCES.
THE PRESIDENT DOES IT ON HIS
OWN.
>> Suarez: BUT FOR ALL THE
REQUEST ABOUT WHETHER A
DECLARATION OF WAR WOULD
CONSTRAIN A PRESIDENT, WOULDN'T
IT ALSO GIVE HIM COVER?
THE KIND OF SUPPORT THAT IT IS
NECESSARY TO HAVE WHEN YOU'RE
LEADING THE COUNTRY INTO THIS
KIND OF VENTURE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
BUT AT THIS PARTICULAR POINT THE
PRESIDENT DOESN'T FEEL THAT HE
NEEDS COVER.
JIM WEBB, THE SENATOR, THE
RETIRED SENATOR FROM VIRGINIA
DID A RECENT ARTICLE IN WHICH HE
SAID THAT THE CONGRESS HAS
BECOME IRRELEVANT IN THE MAKING
AND EXECUTING OF AMERICAN
FOREIGN POLICY.
I HAVE CERTAINLY FOUND THAT TO
BE THE CASE.
THE CONGRESSMEN AND THE SENATORS
ARE VERY GOOD ON ISSUES LIKE
BENGHAZI, BUT WHEN IT COMES TO
AN ISSUE LIKE DECLARING WAR THEY
SAY "LET THE PRESIDENT DO IT.
WHY DO I HAVE TO BEAR
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THAT?
IT TAKES TOO MUCH TIME AWAY FROM
FUND-RAISING.
I HAVE TO ANSWER TO MY
CONSTITUENTS."
AND RIGHT NOW WITH THE CONGRESS
OUT OF THE PICTURE AND THE
PRESIDENT HAVING ESSENTIALLY HIS
OWN ARMY LIKE THE EUROPEAN
MONOMONARCHS OF OLD, THEY HAVE
THEIR OWN ARMY, THE PRESIDENT
CAN GO INTO A WAR WITHOUT
ANYBODY SAYING ANYTHING.
ANYBODY AN EDITORIAL WRITER WILL
SAY SOMETHING BUT THAT'S ABOUT
IT.
>> Suarez: YOU MENTIONED THE
COLD WAR AND THEN THE WAR ON
TERROR STRENGTHENED THE
PRESIDENT'S HAND WHEN HE WANTS
TO MAKE WAR.
PERMANENTLY OR IS THIS A
PRESIDENTIAL POWER THAT WITH
EVENTS MAY WAX OR WAYNE IN
COMING DECADES?
>> IT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION.
THE ONLY SENSE I HAVE RIGHT NOW
IS THAT THE EVIDENCE OVER THE
LAST 30, 40 YEARS SUGGESTS THAT
WE'RE MOVING IN THAT DIRECTION
AND ARE LIKELY TO CONTINUE TO
MOVE IN THAT DIRECTION.
ONE OF THE REASONS THAT THIS
BOOK, BY THE WAY, HAS BEEN ON MY
MIND TO WRITE FOR 40 YEARS NOW
BECAUSE OF ONE OVERRIDING
CONCERN AND THAT IS WHEN TOO
MUCH POWER RESTS IN THE HANDS OF
THE PRESIDENT-- EVEN THE
PRESIDENT-- I THINK WE'RE ALL IN
TROUBLE.
THE WHOLE IDEA AS YOU SAID AT
THE VERY BEGINNING WAS CHECKS
AND BALANCES AND INCREASINGLY
WITH THE CONGRESS ABDICATING ITS
RESPONSIBILITY, THE W THE
PRESIDENT HAVING HIS OWN ARMY IN
EFFECT AND WITH THE MEDIA MORE
OR LESS BENIGNLY GOING ALONG
WITH WHAT'S HAPPENING YOU END UP
WITH THE PRESIDENT HAVING ALL OF
THE POWER TO DO WHATEVER HE
WANTS?
IF HE TOMORROW MORNING DECIDES
WE'RE GOING TO PUT -- WE'RE
GOING TO GO INTO AN ATTACK IN
IRAN, WHO WOULD STOP HIM?
NO ONE.
YOU WOULD JUST LEARN ABOUT IT
AND REPORT IT.
>> Suarez: AND THAT'S THE
THING.
AFTER DECEMBER 8, 1941 F.D.R.
HAD A UNITED NATION AND A UNITED
GOVERNMENT BEHIND HIM AS A
RESULT OF THAT WAR DECLARATION.
>> YES.
>> Suarez: AND LOOK AT THE
WARS, THE INVASIONS, THE VARIOUS
THINGS THAT HAVE HAPPENED IN THE
RECENT DECADES OFTEN LEADING
PRESIDENTS DOWN VERY BAD ROADS
BECAUSE THEY WERE GOING INTO
WAR.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND THIS IS ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT'S SO TERRIBLY IMPORTANT.
WE ARE FIGHTING TOTALLY
DIFFERENT KINDS OF WAR.
SO IF YOU PUT THIS PROPOSITION
TO THE PRESIDENT-- WHO'S A VERY
INTELLIGENT MAN-- AND SAY
"MR. PRESIDENT, ARE YOU REALLY
COMFORTABLE WITH THIS
ARRANGEMENT?"
HE'D SAY "NO."
I'M POSITIVE HE'D SAY NO.
BUT EVERYTHING YIELDS POWER TO
HIM.
WHEN YOU LIVE IN A WORLD THAT IS
SO UNPREDICTABLE, SO UNCERTAIN,
WITH ANYTHING HAPPENING THE NEXT
MORNING YOU HAVE TO TURN TO
SOMEBODY.
AND THE AMERICAN PEOPLE AT THIS
POINT MUST TURN TO THE
PRESIDENT.
THERE IS NO ONE ELSE.
THE CONGRESS HAS SAID GOOD-BYE
AND THE ARMY IS THERE TO DO WHAT
THE PRESIDENT WANTS AS COMMANDER
IN CHIEF.
HE IS THE BOSS.
ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI TOLD ME IN
THE COURSE OF RESEARCHING THIS
HE TOLD ME THE PRESIDENT MAKES
THE KEY DECISION AND AFTER THAT
IT IS THE POLICY OF THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Suarez: THE BOOK IS "THE
ROAD TO WAR."
MARVIN KALB, GREAT TO SEE YOU.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
PRESIDENT OBAMA PLEDGED TO FIGHT
FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS WITH NEW
INVESTMENTS IN JOBS AND
HOMEOWNERSHIP.
THE LEADER OF EGYPT'S MILITARY
CALLED FOR MASS DEMONSTRATIONS
TO SHOW HE HAS POPULAR SUPPORT
TO CONFRONT ONGOING VIOLENCE.
AND A TRAIN DERAILMENT IN
NORTHWESTERN SPAIN KILLED AT
LEAST 35 PEOPLE NEAR SANTIAGO DE
COMPOSTOLA.
SOME 50 OTHERS WERE INJURED.
>> Woodruff: IT'S SCIENCE
WEDNESDAY ONLINE.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE DETAILS.
NA Holman: A NORTH CAROLI
MIDDLE SCHOOL TEACHER TURNS A
WETLAND INTO A SCIENCE
CLASSROOM.
WATCH THE LATEST PROFILE IN OUR
"SUPER STEM" TEACHER SERIES.
SHOULD AMERICA EASE IMMIGRATION
THAT UNDERCUT U.S. G
T THE?
FOREIGN WORKERS TODAY AND THE
OPPOSITE VIEW TOMORROW ON MAKING
SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL HAVE THE
STORY OF A HUNGER STRIKE AMONG
SOME OF THE MOST DANGEROUS
INMATES IN CALIFORNIA'S PRISONS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOODNIGHT.